# 7.1 Dealing with Whitespace

## Problem

We need to convert the XML into a formatted text, but whitespace issues are
ruining the results.  This is not the kind of thing you would expect to take
hours of your time.

## Solution

XML and XSLT have extremely tedious and confusing rules about white space.  You
have new lines, tabs and spaces.  Each are considered nodes, and they are often
copied to the output of your tranform, this will mess up your output, and it is
hard to determine what search terms to use when looking for a solution.

### Too much whitespace

1. Use ``xsl:strip-space`` to get rid of whitespace-only nodes.  This top-level
element with a single attribute, elements, is assigned a whitespace-separated
list of element names that you want stripped of extra whitespace.  Here, extra
whitespace means whitespace-only text nodes. This means, for example, that the
whitespace separating words in the previous comment element are significant
because they are not whitespace only. On the other hand, the whitespace
designated by the special symbols are whitespace only.  A common idiom uses
<xsl:strip-space elements="*"/> to strip whitespace by default and
xsl:preserve-space (see later) to override specific elements. In XSLT 2.0, you
are also allowed to have elements="*:Name", which tells the processor to strip
whitespace in all elements with the given local name regardless of namespace.

2. Use ``normalize-space`` to get rid of extra whitespace.  A common mistake is
to assume that ``xsl:strip-space`` takes care of "extra" whitespace like that
used to align text in the previous comment element. This is not the case. The
parser always considers significant whitespace inside an element's text that is
mixed with nonwhitespace. To remove this extra space, use normalize-space, as
in ``<xsl:value-of select="normalize-space(comment)"/>``.

3. Use translate to get rid of all whitespace.  Another common mistake is to
assume normalize-space strips all whitespace.  This is not the case. Instead,
it strips only leading and trailing whitespace and converts multiple internal
whitespace characters to single spaces. If you need to strip all whitespace,
use ``translate(something,'&#x20;&#xa;&#xd; &#x9;', '')``.

4. Use an empty ``xsl:text`` element to prevent terminating whitespace in the
stylesheet from being considered relevant.  xsl:text is normally considered a
way to preserve whitespace. However, a strategically placed empty ``xsl:text``
element can prevent trailing whitespace in the stylesheet from being
interpreted as significant.

XML:

``` xml
<numbers>
  <number>10</number>
  <number>3.5</number>
  <number>4.44</number>
  <number>77.7777</number>
</numbers>
```

XSLT:

``` xslt
<xsl:stylesheet version="2.0" xmlns:xsl="http://www.w3.org/1999/XSL/Transform">
<xls:output method="text" />
<xls:strip-space elements="*" />

<xsl:template match="numbers">
Without empty text element:
<xsl:apply-templates mode="without" />
With empty text element:
<xsl:apply-tempates mode="with" />
</xsl:template>

<xsl:template match="number" mode="without">
  <xsl:value-of select="." />,
</xsl:template>

<xsl:template match="number" mode="without">
  <xsl:value-of seleect="."/>,<xsl:text />
</xsl:template>

</xsl:stylesheet>
```

Output:

```
Without empty text element:
10,
3.5,
4.44,
77.7777

With empty text element:
10,3.5,4.44,77.7777
```

If you find the ``<xsl:text />`` trick confusing, then wrap the ``,`` like this
instead: ``<xsl:text>,</xsl:text>``.

### Too little whitespace

1. Use xsl:preserve-space to override xsl:strip-space for specific elements.
There is not much point in using xsl:preserve-space unless you also use xsl:
strip-space. This is because the default behavior preserves space in the input
document and documents loaded with the document( ) function.

2. Use xsl:text to precisely specify text-output spacing.
All whitespace inside an xsl:text element is preserved. This preservation allows
precise control over whitespace placement. Sometimes you can use xsl:text to
simply introduce line breaks:

```
<xsl:stylesheet version="1.0" xmlns:xml="http://www.w3.org/1999/XSL/Transform">
<xsl:output method="text" />
<xsl:strip-space element="*" />
<xsl:template match="number">
  <xsl:value-of select="." />
  <xst:text>&#xa;</xsl:text>
</xsl:template>
</xsl:stylesheet>
```

However, the problem with outputting newline characters directly is that some
platforms (e.g., Microsoft's) expect a line break to be represented as
carriage- return plus newline.  However, since XML parsers are required to
convert carriage-return plus newline into a single newline, there is no way to
create a platform-independent stylesheet. Fortunately, most Windows-based
editors and the Windows command prompt handle single newlines correctly. The
one exception is the notepad editor that comes free with Windows.

3. Use nonbreaking space characters.
XSLT does not treat the character #xA0; (nonbreaking space) as normal
whitespace. In particular, ``xsl:strip-space`` and normalize-space( ) both ignore
this character. If you need to strip whitespace most of the time but have
specific instances when it should remain in place, you might try to use this
character in the XML input. Nonbreaking space is particularly useful for HTML
output, but may be of lesser value in other contexts (depending on how the
renderer handles it).








## Discusion

The solution section lists techniques for managing whitespace. However, knowing
the XSLT rules that underlie the techniques is also useful.
The most important rules to know apply to both the stylesheet and input document(s):

1. A text node is never stripped unless it contains only whitespace characters
   (#x20, #x9, #xD, or #xA).  Although they are not all that common, you should
   also understand the effect of ``xml:space`` attributes in both the stylesheet
   and the input document(s).

2. If a text-node's ancestor element has an ``xml:space`` attribute with a value
   of ``preserve``, and no closer ancestor element has ``xml:space`` with a
   value of default, then whitespace-only text nodes are not stripped.  The
   chapter now looks at the rules for stylesheets and source documents
   separately. For stylesheets, your options are simple. (I have no idea what
   he's talking about, look to 7.4 for clues)

3. The only stylesheet elements for which whitespace-only nodes are preserved by
   default are ``xsl:text``. Here, "by default" means unless otherwise specified
   using ``xml:space="preserve"`` as stated earlier in Step 2. See Examples 7-4 and
   7-5.  Example 7-4. Stylesheet demonstrating the effect of ``xsl:text`` and
   ``xml:space=preserve``:

```
<xsl:stylesheet version="1.0" xmlns:xsl="http://www.w3.org/1999/XSL/Transform">

<xsl:output method="text"/>

<xsl:strip-space elements="*"/>

<xsl:template match="numbers">
  Without xml:space="preserve":
  <xsl:apply-templates mode="without-preserve"/>
  With xml:space="preserve":
  <xsl:apply-templates mode="with-preserve"/>
</xsl:template>

<xsl:template match="number" mode="without-preserve">
  <xsl:value-of select="."/><xsl:text> </xsl:text>
</xsl:template>

<xsl:template match="number" mode="with-preserve" xml:space="preserve">
  <xsl:value-of select="."/><xsl:text> </xsl:text>
</xsl:template>

</xsl:stylesheet>

```

Output:

```
Without xml:space="preserve":
10 3.5 4.44 7.777

With xml:space="preserve":

  10
  
  3.5
  
  4.44
  
  77.7777

```

The only whitespace introduced by the first number match is the single space
contained in the xsl:text element. However, when you use
``xml:space="preserve"`` in the second number match template, you pick up all
the whitespace contained in the element including the two line breaks (the first
is after the ``<xsl:template ...>`` and the second is after the ``</xsl:text>``).

For source documents, the rules are as follows:

* Initially, the list of elements in which whitespace is preserved includes all
  elements in the document.

* If an element matches a NameTest in an xsl:strip-space element, then it is
  removed from the list of whitespace-preserving element names.

* If an element name matches a NameTest in an xsl:preserve-space element, then
  it is added to the list of whitespace-preserving element names.

A NameTest is either a simple name (e.g., doc) or a name with a namespace prefix
(e.g., my:doc), wildcard (e.g., ``*``), or a wildcard with a namespace prefix
(e.g., ``my:*``). In XSLT 2.0 ``*:doc`` are also allowed. The default priority
and import precedence rules apply when conflicts exist between xml:strip-space
and xml:preserve-space:

```
<xsl:stylesheet version="1.0" xmlns:xsl="http://www.w3.org/1999/XSL/Transform"
xmlns:my="http://www.ora.com/XSLTCookbook/ns/my">

<!-- Strip whitespace in all elements -->
<xsl:strip-space="*"/>

<!-- except those in the "my" namespace -->
<xsl:preserve-space="my:*"/>

<!-- and those named foo -->
<xsl:preserve-space="foo"/>
```




