# Working with Sequences

In XPath 2.0, every data item (value) is a sequence. Thus, the atomic value 1 is
just as much a sequence as the result of the expression (1 to 10). Another way
of saying this is that every XPath 2.0 expression evaluates to a sequence. A
sequence can contain from zero or more values, and these values can be nodes,
atomic values, or mixtures of each. Order is significant when comparing
sequences. You refer to the individual items of a sequence starting at position
1 (not 0, as someone with a C/Java background might expect).

```
# the empty sequence
()

# Sequence conisting of a single atomic 1
1

# Use the comma operator to construct a sequence.  Here we build a sequence of
# all X child of the context, followed by Y children, followed by Z children.
X, Y, Z

# Use the "to" operator to construct ranges
1 to 10

# Here we combine several ranges
1 to 10, 100 to 110, 17, 19, 23

# Ranges can use variables
1 to $x
1 to count(para)

# Sequences DO NOT nest, so the following sequences are the same
((1,2,3), (4,5))

1,2,3,4,5

# Remove duplicates from a sequence
distinct-values($seq)

# Return the size of a sequence
count($seq)

# Test if a sequence is empty
empty($seq)

# Location the positions of an item in the sequence.  Index-of produces
# a sequence of integers for every item in the first arg that is eq to the
# second
index-of($seq, $item)

# Up to 3 items from $seq, starting from the second
subsequence($seq, 2, 3)

# All items from $seq at position 3 to the end of the sequence
subsequence($seq, 3)

# Insert the sequence $seq2 before the 3rd item of sequence $seq1
insert-before($seq1, 3, $seq2)

# Construct a new sequence that contains all the items of $seq exacpt the 3rd
remove($seq1, 3)

# Interesting ways of removing items
$seq1[not(position = (1,3,5))]

$seq1[position() gt 3 and position() lt 7]
